.\" puzzled(8) man page
.\"
.\" Originally designed at Red Hat LLC by Francis Chow (@openchow) and Adam Miller (@maxamillion)
.\" Licensed under Apache-2.0
.\"
.TH PUZZLED 8 "2026-03-07" "puzzled 0.1.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
puzzled \- PuzzlePod governance daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B puzzled
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIpath\fR]
[\fB\-\-log\-level\fR \fIlevel\fR]
[\fB\-\-bus\-type\fR \fItype\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B puzzled
is the central governance daemon for PuzzlePod.
It manages agent sandbox lifecycles using existing Linux kernel primitives,
implementing the Fork\-Explore\-Commit workflow for autonomous AI agents.
.PP
.B puzzled
runs as a systemd service (Type=notify) and exposes a D\-Bus API on the
system bus at
.BR org.lobstertrap.PuzzlePod1.Manager .
.PP
When an agent sandbox is created,
.B puzzled
performs the following:
.IP \(bu 3
Creates a new process via
.BR clone3 (2)
with PID, mount, and network namespace isolation.
.IP \(bu 3
Sets up an OverlayFS mount for copy\-on\-write filesystem branching.
.IP \(bu 3
Applies an irrevocable Landlock ruleset restricting filesystem and network access.
.IP \(bu 3
Loads a seccomp\-BPF filter blocking escape\-vector syscalls and gating
.BR execve (2),
.BR connect (2),
and
.BR bind (2)
via USER_NOTIF.
.IP \(bu 3
Configures cgroup v2 resource limits (memory, CPU, I/O, PIDs).
.IP \(bu 3
Loads BPF LSM programs for exec counting and rate limiting.
.IP \(bu 3
Establishes fanotify monitoring for behavioral triggers.
.PP
At commit time,
.B puzzled
freezes the agent via
.BR cgroup.freeze ,
walks the OverlayFS upper layer to generate a diff, evaluates OPA/Rego
governance policies, and either commits changes via a WAL\-based crash\-safe
procedure or rolls back with zero residue.
.PP
All kernel enforcement mechanisms (Landlock, seccomp, namespaces, cgroups)
are attached to the agent process and survive
.B puzzled
crashes. If
.B puzzled
restarts, it re\-discovers active branches from the state directory.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config " path"
Path to the configuration file. Default:
.IR /etc/puzzled/puzzled.conf .
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-level " level"
Set the log level. One of:
.BR trace ", " debug ", " info ", " warn ", " error .
Default:
.BR info .
Overrides the
.B log_level
setting in the configuration file.
.TP
.BI \-\-bus\-type " type"
D\-Bus bus type. One of:
.BR system ", " session .
Default:
.BR system .
Use
.B session
for development and testing.
Overrides the
.B bus_type
setting in the configuration file.
.SH CONFIGURATION
See
.BR puzzled.conf (5)
for the configuration file format and available options.
.PP
The default configuration file is
.IR /etc/puzzled/puzzled.conf .
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reload agent profiles and OPA/Rego policies from disk without restarting
the daemon. Active branches are not affected.
.TP
.B SIGTERM
Initiate graceful shutdown. Active agent processes are signaled via
.BR pidfd .
Pending WAL entries are completed before exit.
.TP
.B SIGINT
Same as SIGTERM.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/puzzled.conf
Daemon configuration file. See
.BR puzzled.conf (5).
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles/
Directory containing agent profile YAML files. See
.BR agent\-profile (5).
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/policies/
Directory containing OPA/Rego policy files for commit governance.
.TP
.I /var/lib/puzzled/branches/
State directory for active and completed branches. Contains OverlayFS
upper layers, work directories, and branch metadata.
.TP
.I /var/lib/puzzled/wal/
Write\-ahead log directory for crash\-safe commit operations.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/puzzled.service
systemd service unit.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/puzzle@.service
systemd template unit for agent processes.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/puzzle.slice
systemd slice for collective agent resource limits.
.SH D\-BUS API
.B puzzled
registers the
.B org.lobstertrap.PuzzlePod1.Manager
interface on the system bus. See
.I /usr/share/dbus\-1/interfaces/org.lobstertrap.PuzzlePod1.Manager.xml
for the full introspection XML.
.PP
Key methods:
.BR CreateBranch ,
.BR CommitBranch ,
.BR RollbackBranch ,
.BR InspectBranch ,
.BR ListBranches ,
.BR DiffBranch ,
.BR ListAgents ,
.BR KillAgent ,
.BR ReloadPolicy ,
.BR QueryAuditEvents ,
.BR ExportAuditEvents .
.PP
Key signals:
.BR BranchCreated ,
.BR BranchCommitted ,
.BR BranchRolledBack ,
.BR PolicyViolation ,
.BR BehavioralTrigger .
.SH SECURITY
.B puzzled
runs as root with minimal capabilities and is confined by:
.IP \(bu 3
SELinux type enforcement (puzzlepod_t domain)
.IP \(bu 3
systemd hardening directives (NoNewPrivileges, ProtectSystem=strict, etc.)
.IP \(bu 3
Capability bounding set restricted to CAP_SYS_ADMIN, CAP_SYS_PTRACE,
CAP_SETUID, CAP_SETGID, CAP_NET_ADMIN
.PP
Agent processes are confined by independent, irrevocable kernel mechanisms:
Landlock, seccomp\-BPF, PID namespace, mount namespace, network namespace,
cgroups v2, BPF LSM, and SELinux (puzzlepod_t domain).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal termination.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error (configuration, permissions, D\-Bus registration failure).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR puzzlectl (1),
.BR puzzled.conf (5),
.BR agent\-profile (5),
.BR systemd (1),
.BR landlock (7),
.BR seccomp (2),
.BR clone3 (2),
.BR cgroups (7),
.BR selinux (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Francis Chow and the PuzzlePod contributors.
