.\" puzzled.conf(5) man page
.\"
.\" Originally designed at Red Hat LLC by Francis Chow (@openchow) and Adam Miller (@maxamillion)
.\" Licensed under Apache-2.0
.\"
.TH PUZZLED.CONF 5 "2026-03-07" "puzzled 0.1.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
puzzled.conf \- configuration file for the PuzzlePod governance daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/puzzled/puzzled.conf
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I puzzled.conf
file configures the
.BR puzzled (8)
governance daemon. The file uses YAML syntax. Each configuration directive
is specified as a key\-value pair.
.PP
Changes to this file take effect on daemon restart. Some settings (profiles
and policies directories) can be reloaded at runtime by sending SIGHUP to
the daemon or by running
.BR "puzzlectl policy reload" .
.SH DIRECTIVES
.TP
.BI branch_root " path"
Root directory for branch storage. Contains OverlayFS upper layers, work
directories, WAL journals, and branch metadata. Must be on an XFS
filesystem for project quota support.
.br
Default:
.I /var/lib/puzzled/branches
.TP
.BI profiles_dir " path"
Directory containing agent profile YAML files. Each
.I .yaml
file in this directory defines an agent profile that can be referenced by
name when creating branches. See
.BR agent\-profile (5).
.br
Default:
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles
.TP
.BI policies_dir " path"
Directory containing OPA/Rego policy files. These policies are compiled to
Wasm and evaluated at commit time to determine whether an agent's changes
should be applied.
.br
Default:
.I /etc/puzzled/policies
.TP
.BI max_branches " integer"
Maximum number of concurrent active branches. Each branch consumes memory
for OverlayFS metadata, WAL state, and monitoring file descriptors. Set
lower on resource\-constrained edge devices.
.br
Default:
.B 64
.br
Range: 1\-256
.TP
.BI watchdog_timeout_secs " integer"
systemd watchdog timeout in seconds.
.B puzzled
sends
.B sd_notify(WATCHDOG=1)
at half this interval. Set to 0 to disable the watchdog. This value must
match the
.B WatchdogSec
directive in the
.B puzzled.service
systemd unit file.
.br
Default:
.B 30
.br
Range: 0\-300
.TP
.BI bus_type " string"
D\-Bus bus type for the puzzled management interface.
.RS
.TP
.B system
Register on the system bus (production). Requires D\-Bus policy
configuration for access control.
.TP
.B session
Register on the session bus (development and testing). No root
privileges required.
.RE
.IP
Default:
.B system
.TP
.BI fs_type " string"
Filesystem type for branch storage. Determines quota support and
performance characteristics.
.RS
.TP
.B xfs
Recommended. Supports project quotas for per\-branch storage and inode
limits.
.TP
.B ext4
Supported with limited quota capabilities.
.TP
.B btrfs
Supported. Can use subvolumes for branch isolation.
.RE
.IP
Default:
.B xfs
.TP
.BI log_level " string"
Logging verbosity level. One of:
.BR trace ", " debug ", " info ", " warn ", " error .
Can be overridden by the
.B \-\-log\-level
command\-line option.
.br
Default:
.B info
.TP
.BI bpf_obj_path " path"
Path to compiled BPF object files for the BPF LSM programs used for exec
counting and rate limiting. These are loaded into the kernel at branch
creation time.
.br
Default:
.I /usr/lib/puzzled/bpf/
.SH EXAMPLE
.PP
.RS
.nf
# puzzled configuration
branch_root: /var/lib/puzzled/branches
profiles_dir: /etc/puzzled/profiles
policies_dir: /etc/puzzled/policies
max_branches: 64
bus_type: system
fs_type: xfs
log_level: info
watchdog_timeout_secs: 30
bpf_obj_path: /usr/lib/puzzled/bpf/
.fi
.RE
.SH EDGE DEVICE CONFIGURATION
For resource\-constrained edge devices (4GB+ RAM), reduce resource usage:
.PP
.RS
.nf
branch_root: /var/lib/puzzled/branches
profiles_dir: /etc/puzzled/profiles
policies_dir: /etc/puzzled/policies
max_branches: 8
bus_type: system
fs_type: xfs
log_level: warn
watchdog_timeout_secs: 60
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/puzzled.conf
Default configuration file location.
.TP
.I /var/lib/puzzled/branches/
Default branch storage root.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR puzzled (8),
.BR puzzlectl (1),
.BR agent\-profile (5),
.BR systemd.service (5)
.SH AUTHORS
Francis Chow and the PuzzlePod contributors.
