.\" puzzlepod-profile(5) man page
.\"
.\" Originally designed at Red Hat LLC by Francis Chow (@openchow) and Adam Miller (@maxamillion)
.\" Licensed under Apache-2.0
.\"
.TH PUZZLEPOD\-PROFILE 5 "2026-03-07" "puzzled 0.1.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
puzzlepod\-profile \- agent profile YAML format for PuzzlePod
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles/*.yaml
.SH DESCRIPTION
Agent profile files define per\-agent access control for sandboxes created
by the
.BR puzzled (8)
governance daemon. Each profile is a YAML file placed in the profiles
directory (default:
.IR /etc/puzzled/profiles/ ).
.PP
When a branch is created with
.BR "puzzlectl branch create \-\-profile" " \fIname\fR" ,
the daemon loads the corresponding
.I name.yaml
file and configures kernel enforcement mechanisms accordingly.
.SH FIELDS
.SS Top\-Level Fields
.TP
.BI name " string"
.RI ( required )
Unique name for the profile. Must match the filename (without
.I .yaml
extension). Used as the
.B \-\-profile
argument to
.BR "puzzlectl branch create" .
.TP
.BI description " string"
.RI ( optional )
Human\-readable description of the profile's purpose and security posture.
.TP
.BI fail_mode " string"
.RI ( optional )
Behavior when the governance daemon cannot evaluate policy. One of:
.RS
.TP
.B fail\-closed
Deny the operation. This is the default and recommended setting.
.TP
.B fail\-silent
Hold the last known safe state. Useful for edge devices where brief
communication loss is expected.
.TP
.B fail\-operational
Continue with reduced capabilities. For environments requiring continuous
operation.
.TP
.B fail\-safe\-state
Initiate a controlled stop or return to a defined safe state. For
safety\-critical deployments (IEC 61508, ISO 26262).
.RE
.IP
Default:
.B fail\-closed
.SS filesystem
Filesystem access control. Defines which paths the agent can read, write,
and which paths are always denied.
.TP
.BI read_allowlist " list"
List of filesystem paths the agent is allowed to read. These are applied
as Landlock rules with read access. Paths are recursive \(em granting read
to
.I /usr/share
permits reading any file under that directory.
.TP
.BI write_allowlist " list"
List of filesystem paths the agent is allowed to write. Applied as
Landlock rules with write access. In most profiles, this is empty because
all writes go to the OverlayFS upper layer (the branch).
.TP
.BI denylist " list"
List of filesystem paths that are always denied, regardless of
allowlist rules. Takes precedence over allowlists. Use this for sensitive
paths such as
.IR /etc/shadow ", " /etc/ssh ", " /root/.ssh .
.SS exec_allowlist
List of executable paths the agent is permitted to run via
.BR execve (2).
Each
.BR execve (2)
call is intercepted by seccomp USER_NOTIF and validated against this list
by
.BR puzzled .
Glob patterns are supported (e.g.,
.IR /usr/bin/* ).
.SS resource_limits
Resource limits enforced via cgroups v2 and XFS project quotas.
.TP
.BI memory_bytes " integer"
Maximum memory in bytes. The kernel OOM killer terminates the agent if
this limit is exceeded.
.TP
.BI cpu_shares " integer"
CPU shares (cgroup v2 cpu.weight). Relative to other agents. Range: 1\-10000.
.TP
.BI io_weight " integer"
I/O weight (cgroup v2 io.weight). Relative to other agents. Range: 1\-10000.
.TP
.BI max_pids " integer"
Maximum number of processes in the agent's PID namespace (cgroup v2
pids.max).
.TP
.BI storage_quota_mb " integer"
Maximum storage in megabytes for the OverlayFS upper layer. Enforced via
XFS project quotas.
.TP
.BI inode_quota " integer"
Maximum number of inodes (files) in the OverlayFS upper layer. Enforced
via XFS project quotas.
.SS network
Network access control.
.TP
.BI mode " string"
Network access mode. One of:
.RS
.TP
.B Blocked
No network access. The agent runs in an isolated network namespace with
no interfaces.
.TP
.B Gated
Network access is permitted only to domains listed in
.BR allowed_domains .
Connections to other destinations are blocked by nftables rules and
seccomp USER_NOTIF interception of
.BR connect (2).
.TP
.B Monitored
All network access is permitted but logged. Connection attempts are
recorded in the audit log.
.TP
.B Unrestricted
All network access is permitted without logging. Use only for fully
trusted agents.
.RE
.TP
.BI allowed_domains " list"
List of domain names the agent is allowed to connect to when
.B mode
is set to
.BR Gated .
DNS resolution is performed by
.B puzzled
and nftables rules are configured for the resolved IP addresses. Ignored
for other network modes.
.SS behavioral
Behavioral monitoring configuration. These triggers use fanotify to
monitor file access patterns and alert or terminate the agent when
anomalous behavior is detected.
.TP
.BI max_deletions " integer"
Maximum number of file deletions before triggering an alert. Defends
against mass deletion attacks from a hallucinating agent.
.TP
.BI max_reads_per_minute " integer"
Maximum file read operations per minute. Defends against data exfiltration
patterns where an agent rapidly reads many files.
.TP
.BI credential_access_alert " boolean"
If
.BR true ,
generate an alert when the agent attempts to read files matching known
credential patterns (SSH keys, AWS credentials, GPG keyrings, etc.),
even if the read is denied by Landlock.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Restricted Profile
Minimal access for untrusted agents:
.PP
.RS
.nf
name: restricted
description: >
  Minimal access profile for untrusted or experimental agents.
  No network access, small quotas, narrow filesystem scope.

filesystem:
  read_allowlist:
    \- /usr/share
    \- /usr/lib
    \- /usr/lib64
  write_allowlist: []
  denylist:
    \- /etc/shadow
    \- /etc/passwd
    \- /etc/ssh
    \- /root
    \- /home

exec_allowlist:
  \- /usr/bin/python3
  \- /usr/bin/cat
  \- /usr/bin/ls
  \- /usr/bin/grep

resource_limits:
  memory_bytes: 268435456
  cpu_shares: 50
  io_weight: 50
  max_pids: 16
  storage_quota_mb: 256
  inode_quota: 1000

network:
  mode: Blocked
  allowed_domains: []

behavioral:
  max_deletions: 10
  max_reads_per_minute: 100
  credential_access_alert: true
.fi
.RE
.SS Standard Profile
Project\-scoped access for trusted development agents:
.PP
.RS
.nf
name: standard
description: >
  Standard profile for trusted development agents.

filesystem:
  read_allowlist:
    \- /usr/share
    \- /usr/lib
    \- /usr/lib64
    \- /usr/include
  write_allowlist: []
  denylist:
    \- /etc/shadow
    \- /etc/ssh
    \- /root/.ssh

exec_allowlist:
  \- /usr/bin/python3
  \- /usr/bin/gcc
  \- /usr/bin/make
  \- /usr/bin/cargo
  \- /usr/bin/git
  \- /usr/bin/curl

resource_limits:
  memory_bytes: 536870912
  cpu_shares: 100
  io_weight: 100
  max_pids: 64
  storage_quota_mb: 1024
  inode_quota: 10000

network:
  mode: Gated
  allowed_domains:
    \- pypi.org
    \- github.com
    \- crates.io

behavioral:
  max_deletions: 50
  max_reads_per_minute: 1000
  credential_access_alert: true
.fi
.RE
.SS Safety\-Critical Profile
For deployments requiring functional safety:
.PP
.RS
.nf
name: safety\-critical

fail_mode: fail\-safe\-state

filesystem:
  read_allowlist:
    \- /usr/share
    \- /usr/lib
  write_allowlist: []
  denylist:
    \- /etc
    \- /root
    \- /home

exec_allowlist:
  \- /usr/bin/python3

resource_limits:
  memory_bytes: 134217728
  cpu_shares: 25
  io_weight: 25
  max_pids: 8
  storage_quota_mb: 64
  inode_quota: 500

network:
  mode: Blocked
  allowed_domains: []

behavioral:
  max_deletions: 5
  max_reads_per_minute: 50
  credential_access_alert: true
.fi
.RE
.SH VALIDATION
Use
.B puzzlectl profile validate
to check a profile against the JSON schema:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl profile validate /etc/puzzled/profiles/my\-agent.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use
.B puzzlectl profile test
to simulate a profile against a test scenario:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl profile test my\-agent \-\-simulate read\-write\-test
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles/
Default directory for profile YAML files.
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles/restricted.yaml
Built\-in restricted profile.
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles/standard.yaml
Built\-in standard profile.
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles/privileged.yaml
Built\-in privileged profile.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR puzzled (8),
.BR puzzlectl (1),
.BR puzzled.conf (5),
.BR landlock (7),
.BR seccomp (2),
.BR cgroups (7)
.SH AUTHORS
Francis Chow and the PuzzlePod contributors.
