.\" puzzlectl(1) man page
.\"
.\" Originally designed at Red Hat LLC by Francis Chow (@openchow) and Adam Miller (@maxamillion)
.\" Licensed under Apache-2.0
.\"
.TH PUZZLECTL 1 "2026-03-07" "puzzlectl 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
puzzlectl \- command\-line management tool for PuzzlePod
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B puzzlectl
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR]
.I COMMAND
.I SUBCOMMAND
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B puzzlectl
is the command\-line interface for managing PuzzlePod agent sandboxes,
branches, profiles, policies, and audit events. It communicates with the
.BR puzzled (8)
governance daemon via D\-Bus.
.PP
All output is human\-readable by default. Use
.B \-\-output=json
for machine\-parseable JSON output.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-output " format"
Output format. One of:
.BR text " (default), " json .
.TP
.BI \-\-bus\-type " type"
D\-Bus bus type. One of:
.BR system " (default), " session .
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print help information.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version information.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS run \- Single\-command governed execution
.TP
.B puzzlectl run \fB\-\-profile\fR \fIname\fR [\fB\-\-base\fR \fIdir\fR] [\fB\-\-auto\-commit\fR|\fB\-\-auto\-rollback\fR] [\fB\-\-no\-diff\fR] \fB\-\-\fR \fIcommand\fR [\fIargs...\fR]
Run a command with full governance lifecycle. Creates a branch, activates
the agent, waits for exit, displays the diff, and prompts for commit or
rollback. Combines the
.BR "branch create" ", " "branch activate" ", " "branch diff" ", and " "branch approve/rollback"
steps into a single operation.
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-profile " name"
Agent profile to use (default:
.BR standard ).
.TP
.BI \-\-base " dir"
Base directory for OverlayFS lower layer (default:
.BR . ).
Resolved to an absolute path before use.
.TP
.B \-\-auto\-commit
Automatically commit changes after the agent exits. Skips the interactive
prompt. Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-auto\-rollback .
.TP
.B \-\-auto\-rollback
Automatically discard all changes after the agent exits. Useful for
experiments and dry runs. Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-auto\-commit .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-diff
Suppress diff output before the approval prompt.
.RE
.IP
If stdin is not a terminal and neither
.B \-\-auto\-commit
nor
.B \-\-auto\-rollback
is specified, changes are rolled back (fail\-closed).
.SS branch \- Branch management
.TP
.B puzzlectl branch create \fB\-\-profile\fR \fIname\fR \fB\-\-base\-path\fR \fIpath\fR [\fB\-\-command\fR \fIcmd\fR]
Create a new agent branch. The agent process runs in an isolated sandbox
with an OverlayFS upper layer, constrained by the specified profile.
Returns the branch ID.
.TP
.B puzzlectl branch list
List all active and recently completed branches. Displays branch ID,
profile, status, creation time, and agent PID.
.TP
.B puzzlectl branch inspect \fIbranch\-id\fR
Display detailed information about a branch, including profile settings,
resource usage, namespace IDs, and changeset summary.
.TP
.B puzzlectl branch approve \fIbranch\-id\fR
Approve a branch for commit. Triggers OPA/Rego policy evaluation; if the
policy passes, the branch changes are committed to the base filesystem
via the WAL\-based crash\-safe procedure.
.TP
.B puzzlectl branch reject \fIbranch\-id\fR
Reject a branch. The OverlayFS upper layer is discarded with zero residue.
The agent process is terminated.
.TP
.B puzzlectl branch rollback \fIbranch\-id\fR
Roll back a branch, discarding all changes. Equivalent to reject for
active branches. For committed branches, reverses the commit using the
WAL journal.
.TP
.B puzzlectl branch diff \fIbranch\-id\fR
Display the changeset diff for a branch. Lists all files created, modified,
or deleted in the OverlayFS upper layer, with checksums and sizes.
.SS agent \- Agent process management
.TP
.B puzzlectl agent list
List all running agent processes with their branch ID, PID, profile,
uptime, and resource usage.
.TP
.B puzzlectl agent info \fIbranch\-id\fR
Display detailed information about an agent process, including its PID
namespace, cgroup path, Landlock ruleset, seccomp filter status, and
behavioral monitoring state.
.TP
.B puzzlectl agent kill \fIbranch\-id\fR
Terminate the agent process associated with the specified branch. The
process is killed via
.BR pidfd_send_signal (2),
and the PID namespace ensures all child processes are cleaned up.
.SS profile \- Profile management
.TP
.B puzzlectl profile list
List all available agent profiles with their name, description, network
mode, and resource limits summary.
.TP
.B puzzlectl profile show \fIname\fR
Display the full YAML content of a profile.
.TP
.B puzzlectl profile validate \fIpath\fR
Validate a profile YAML file against the JSON schema. Reports any errors
in the profile structure or field values.
.TP
.B puzzlectl profile test \fIname\fR \fB\-\-simulate\fR \fIscenario\fR
Test a profile against a simulated scenario. The scenario describes a set
of filesystem operations, exec calls, and network connections. The command
reports which operations would be allowed or denied.
.TP
.B puzzlectl profile init [\fB\-\-non\-interactive\fR] [\fB\-\-name\fR \fIname\fR] [\fB\-\-extends\fR \fIparent\fR] [\fB\-\-network\-mode\fR \fImode\fR] [\fB\-\-out\fR \fIfile\fR]
Generate a new profile YAML file interactively or from command\-line flags.
Prompts for name, description, write directories, network mode, memory
limit, max PIDs, and storage quota. If
.B \-\-non\-interactive
is specified, uses sensible defaults for all unprovided values. Output goes
to stdout by default, or to the file specified by
.BR \-\-out .
.SS policy \- Policy management
.TP
.B puzzlectl policy reload
Reload OPA/Rego policies from the policies directory. Active branches
are not affected; new policy takes effect on the next commit evaluation.
.TP
.B puzzlectl policy test \fB\-\-input\fR \fIpath\fR
Test OPA/Rego policies against a synthetic input file. The input file
contains a JSON representation of a changeset. Reports the policy
decision and any violations.
.TP
.B puzzlectl policy add\-rule [\fB\-\-deny\-path\fR \fIglob\fR] [\fB\-\-max\-file\-size\fR \fIbytes\fR] [\fB\-\-deny\-extension\fR \fIexts\fR] [\fB\-\-max\-files\fR \fIn\fR] [\fB\-\-severity\fR \fIlevel\fR] [\fB\-\-message\fR \fItext\fR] [\fB\-\-policy\-file\fR \fIfile\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Add a governance rule from a template without writing Rego by hand.
At least one rule type flag is required. Supported rule types:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-deny\-path " glob"
Deny files matching a glob pattern (e.g., "*.prod.yml").
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-file\-size " bytes"
Deny files exceeding the specified size in bytes.
.TP
.BI \-\-deny\-extension " exts"
Deny files with specified extensions (comma\-separated, e.g., ".exe,.dll").
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-files " n"
Deny changesets with more than
.I n
files.
.TP
.BI \-\-severity " level"
Violation severity:
.BR warning ", " error " (default), " critical .
.TP
.BI \-\-message " text"
Custom violation message template. Overrides the default message for the rule type.
.TP
.BI \-\-policy\-file " file"
Path to the policy file to write or append to. Defaults to the policies directory.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Print the generated Rego to stdout without writing to disk.
.RE
.SS audit \- Audit event management
.TP
.B puzzlectl audit list [\fB\-\-branch\fR \fIid\fR] [\fB\-\-since\fR \fItimestamp\fR] [\fB\-\-until\fR \fItimestamp\fR]
List audit events, optionally filtered by branch ID and time range.
Displays event type, timestamp, branch, and summary.
.TP
.B puzzlectl audit export \fB\-\-format\fR \fIfmt\fR [\fB\-\-output\fR \fIpath\fR]
Export audit events in the specified format. Supported formats:
.BR json ", " csv ", " cel .
Writes to stdout by default, or to the specified output file.
.TP
.B puzzlectl audit verify [\fB\-\-branch\fR \fIid\fR]
Verify the integrity of audit event signatures using IMA measurements.
Reports any tampered or missing events.
.SH EXAMPLES
Run a governed command (single step):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl run \-\-profile=standard \-\- python3 agent.py
[run] creating branch (profile=standard)...
[run] branch br\-x1y2z3 created, activating...
[run] agent running, waiting for exit...
[run] agent exited (state: exited)
[run] 2 file(s) changed:
+ src/output.txt (256 bytes)
~ src/data.json (1024 bytes)

[run] approve changes? [y/N/d(iff)]:
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run with auto\-rollback (for experiments):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl run \-\-auto\-rollback \-\- ./experiment.sh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate a profile and add a custom policy rule:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl profile init \-\-non\-interactive \-\-name my\-agent \-\-extends standard
$ puzzlectl policy add\-rule \-\-deny\-path "*.prod.yml" \-\-severity critical \-\-dry\-run
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a branch with the standard profile:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl branch create \-\-profile standard \-\-base\-path /home/user/project
Branch created: br\-a1b2c3d4
.fi
.RE
.PP
List all active branches:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl branch list
ID            PROFILE     STATUS   CREATED              PID
br\-a1b2c3d4   standard    active   2026\-03\-07T10:00:00  12345
br\-e5f6g7h8   restricted  active   2026\-03\-07T09:30:00  12300
.fi
.RE
.PP
Inspect a branch diff:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl branch diff br\-a1b2c3d4
M  src/main.rs        (1024 bytes, sha256:abc123...)
A  src/new_module.rs  (512 bytes, sha256:def456...)
D  src/old_file.rs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Approve and commit a branch:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl branch approve br\-a1b2c3d4
Policy evaluation: PASS (0 violations)
Branch br\-a1b2c3d4 committed successfully.
.fi
.RE
.PP
Validate a custom profile:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl profile validate /etc/puzzled/profiles/my\-agent.yaml
Profile validation: OK
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export audit events as JSON:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ puzzlectl audit export \-\-format json \-\-output /tmp/audit.json
Exported 142 events to /tmp/audit.json
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
General error (D\-Bus communication failure, invalid arguments).
.TP
.B 2
Policy violation (commit rejected by governance policy).
.TP
.B 3
Branch not found.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/profiles/
Agent profile YAML files. See
.BR agent\-profile (5).
.TP
.I /etc/puzzled/policies/
OPA/Rego policy files.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR puzzled (8),
.BR puzzled.conf (5),
.BR agent\-profile (5)
.SH AUTHORS
Francis Chow and the PuzzlePod contributors.
